feat: Canister backup and restore (#259)
dfinity/interface-spec: spec/index.md

Provides the history of the canister, its current module SHA-256 hash, and its current controllers. Every canister can call this method on every other canister (including itself). Users cannot call this method.

> The canister history consists of a list of canister changes (canister creation, code uninstallation, code deployment, snapshot restoration, or controllers change). Every canister change consists of the system timestamp at which the change was performed, the canister version after performing the change, the change's origin (a user or a canister), and its details. The change origin includes the principal (called *originator* in the following) that initiated the change and, if the originator is a canister, the originator's canister version when the originator initiated the change (if available). Code deployments are described by their mode (code install, code reinstall, code upgrade) and the SHA-256 hash of the newly deployed canister module. Loading a snapshot is described by the canister version, snapshot ID and timestamp at which the snapshot was taken. Canister creations and controllers changes are described by the full new set of the canister controllers after the change. The order of controllers stored in the canister history may vary depending on the implementation.

Reviewer: > Loading a snapshot is described by the canister version, snapshot ID and timestamp at which the snapshot was taken.

This might need to be clarified a bit. The canister version in the history is the version after loading the snapshot but the current phrasing sounds like it might be the old version of the canister when the snapshot was taken.

Reviewer: Clarified with Alexandra offline. There's a small bug in the replica which I will fix.

The [standard nearest-rank estimation method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Percentile#The_nearest-rank_method), inclusive, with the addition of a 0th percentile is used. Concretely, for any i from 1 to 100, the ith percentile is the fee with rank `⌈i * 100⌉`. The 0th percentile is defined as the smallest fee (excluding coinbase transactions).

### IC method `take_snapshot` {#ic-take_snapshot}

> This method takes a snapshot of the canister. Subsequent `take_snapshot` calls will replace the existing snapshot with a new one.

Reviewer 2: Absolutely!

> This method takes a snapshot of the canister. Subsequent `take_snapshot` calls will replace the existing snapshot with a new one.

Reviewer 3: Moreover, ideally we'd also have model snapshots in the IC state and have dedicated transitions in the formal semantics.

> This method takes a snapshot of the canister. Subsequent `take_snapshot` calls will replace the existing snapshot with a new one.

Author: @mraszyk I have updated the semantics too. And I think I have also covered all the other suggestions. Please take a look when you have time.

> The optional `duration` parameter can be used to limit the storage duration of a snapshot. When provided, the snapshot will be stored for the specified duration (in seconds) and will be deleted automatically at the end of this duration. In this case,

Reviewer 2: I think `duration` is a weird name. It sounds like it would be the duration of the `take_snapshot`. Would it maybe be easier to name this `delete_at_timestamp` or `preserve_until_timestamp` or so?

Author: Sure, we rename it, `preserve_until_timestamp` sounds better, or `preserve_duration`?

Author: I had a discussion today with Ulan. I will remove `duration` altogether. I was informed that there had been some work on `reserved_cycles,` which reserves cycles from the balance for resource allocation for a longer period of time. We will integrate the snapshots with `reserve_cycles` mechanism, so the duration does not make sense anymore. Will update the design.

subsequent calls to `load_snapshot` or `delete_snapshot` will fail.  

It's important to note that a snapshot will increase the memory footprint of the canister. Thus, the balance must have the right amount of cycles to support the new freezing threshold.

Only controllers can take a snapshot of a canister and restore it.

### IC method `load_snapshot` {#ic-take_snapshot}

This method loads a snapshot identified by `snapshot_id` onto the canister.  

Only controllers can take a snapshot of a canister and restore it.

### IC method `list_snapshots` {#ic-take_snapshot}

This method lists the snapshots of the canister identified by `canister_id`. Currently, only one snapshot per canister will be stored.

### IC method `delete_snapshot` {#ic-take_snapshot}

This method deletes the snapshot of the canister. An error will be returned if the snapshot is not found. A snapshot cannot be 

> found if it was previously deleted, replaced by a new snapshot through a `take_snapshot` request, or if the canister itself has been deleted.

Reviewer 3: > replaced by a new snapshot through a `take_snapshot` request

it sounds weird that the API is formulated as if multiple snapshots per canister were allowed but there's also the implicit replacement of an old snapshot if `take_snapshot` is called - wouldn't it make more sense to fail `take_snapshot` if there already exists a snapshot (forcing the user to call `delete_snapshot` before calling `take_snapshot` again)? I guess this is how it's gonna work once the 1-snapshot restriction is lifted in the future (if it's not gonna be lifted, then we should have vectors and plural in the API).

Reviewer 3: cc @AlexandraZapuc

Author: > it sounds weird that the API is formulated as if multiple snapshots per canister were allowed  

@mraszyk  Which part is formulated as multiple snapshots?  Do you mean this :  `list_snapshots: (record {canister_id : canister_id}) -> (vec snapshot)`?

Author: I have changed the api following the discussion with @mraszyk. I will add the rest of the semantics.

> A snapshot may be deleted only by the controllers of the canister which owns the snapshot.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A snapshot may be deleted only by the controllers of the canister for which the snapshot was taken.
```

The [standard nearest-rank estimation method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Percentile#The_nearest-rank_method), inclusive, with the addition of a 0th percentile is used. Concretely, for any i from 1 to 100, the ith percentile is the fee with rank `⌈i * 100⌉`. The 0th percentile is defined as the smallest fee (excluding coinbase transactions).

### IC method `take_snapshot` {#ic-take_snapshot}

This method takes a snapshot of the canister. Subsequent `take_snapshot` calls will replace the existing snapshot with a new one.

> The optional `duration` parameter can be used to limit the storage duration of a snapshot. When provided, the snapshot will be stored for the specified duration (in seconds) and will be deleted automatically at the end of this duration. In this case,

Reviewer 4: Is this feature necessary for the V1 of snapshotting? I think the concept of a duration for deleting snapshots may also clash with the ongoing work on pre-emptive storage charging that's being done by the runtime team, so it might be better to avoid it for now and potentially introduce it later if the need arises.

Author: Yes, that is the case. I discussed with Ulan about this today. So I removed it. I will update the doc about the behavior considering the `reserve_cycles.`

The [standard nearest-rank estimation method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Percentile#The_nearest-rank_method), inclusive, with the addition of a 0th percentile is used. Concretely, for any i from 1 to 100, the ith percentile is the fee with rank `⌈i * 100⌉`. The 0th percentile is defined as the smallest fee (excluding coinbase transactions).

### IC method `take_snapshot` {#ic-take_snapshot}

This method takes a snapshot of the canister. Subsequent `take_snapshot` calls will replace the existing snapshot with a new one.

It's important to note that a snapshot will increase the memory footprint of the canister. Thus, the balance must have the right amount of cycles to support the new freezing threshold.

Only controllers can take a snapshot of a canister and restore it.

:::note

> It's important to stop a canister before taking a snapshot to ensure that all outstanding callbacks are completed. Failing to do so may cause the canister to not make sense of the callbacks if its state is restored using the snapshot.

Author: I added info about what is saved. Let me know if it's not enough.

It is expected that the canister admin (or their tooling) does this separately.

:::

### IC method `load_snapshot` {#ic-take_snapshot}

> This method loads a snapshot identified by `snapshot_id` onto the canister.  This method fails if the snapshot was previously deleted.

Reviewer 5: Is it recommended to try and stop the canister before loading the snapshot? Are there any downsides to loading a snapshot on a non-stopped canister?

Reviewer 3: > Is it recommended to try and stop the canister before loading the snapshot?
Yes, it should be.

> Are there any downsides to loading a snapshot on a non-stopped canister?
The loaded snapshot might not know how to deal with outstanding callbacks.

Author: So basically, the requests and responses that are in progress will continue to flow as expected, they will not be touched by the snapshots. However, the canister state can change arbitrarily, so it's up to the developer to decide when to take a snapshot and to restore it. 
 It's a behavior similar to installing code. Loading a snapshot will update the canister module, so again, the canister might not be able to make sense of the callbacks.

### IC method `take_snapshot` {#ic-take_snapshot}

This method takes a snapshot of the specified canister. A snapshot consists of the wasm memory, stable memory, certified variables, wasm chunk store and binary.

Subsequent `take_snapshot` calls will create a new snapshot. However, a `take_snapshot` call might fail if the maximum number of snapshots per canister is reached. This error can be avoided by providing a snapshot ID via the optional `replace_snapshot` parameter. The snapshot identified by the specified ID will be deleted. Currently, only one snapshot per canister is allowed.

It's important to note that a snapshot will increase the memory footprint of the canister. Thus, the balance must have the right amount of cycles to support the new freezing threshold.

Only controllers can take a snapshot of a canister and restore it.

:::note

It's important to stop a canister before taking a snapshot to ensure that all outstanding callbacks are completed. Failing to do so may cause the canister to not make sense of the callbacks if its state is restored using the snapshot.

> It is expected that the canister admin (or their tooling) does this separately.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is expected that the canister controllers (or their tooling) do this separately.
```

The [standard nearest-rank estimation method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Percentile#The_nearest-rank_method), inclusive, with the addition of a 0th percentile is used. Concretely, for any i from 1 to 100, the ith percentile is the fee with rank `⌈i * 100⌉`. The 0th percentile is defined as the smallest fee (excluding coinbase transactions).

### IC method `take_snapshot` {#ic-take_snapshot}

> This method takes a snapshot of the specified canister. A snapshot consists of the wasm memory, stable memory, certified variables, wasm chunk store and wasm binary.

Reviewer 3: certified variables are missing in the formal definition of `Snapshot = {`

> Subsequent `take_snapshot` calls will create a new snapshot. However, a `take_snapshot` call might fail if the maximum number of snapshots per canister is reached. This error can be avoided by providing a snapshot ID via the optional `replace_snapshot` parameter. The snapshot identified by the specified ID will be deleted. Currently, only one snapshot per canister is allowed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Subsequent `take_snapshot` calls will create a new snapshot. However, a `take_snapshot` call might fail if the maximum number of snapshots per canister is reached. This error can be avoided by providing a snapshot ID via the optional `replace_snapshot` parameter. The snapshot identified by the specified ID will be deleted once a new snapshot has been successfully created. Currently, only one snapshot per canister is allowed.
```

> It's important to note that a snapshot will increase the memory footprint of the canister. Thus, the balance must have the right amount of cycles to support the new freezing threshold.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It's important to note that a snapshot will increase the memory footprint of the canister. Thus, the canister's balance must have a sufficient amount of cycles to support the new freezing threshold.
```

> Only controllers can take a snapshot of a canister and restore it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Only controllers can take a snapshot of a canister and load it back to the canister.
```

:::note

It's important to stop a canister before taking a snapshot to ensure that all outstanding callbacks are completed. Failing to do so may cause the canister to not make sense of the callbacks if its state is restored using the snapshot.
It is expected that the canister controllers (or their tooling) do this separately.

:::

### IC method `load_snapshot` {#ic-take_snapshot}

> This method loads a snapshot identified by `snapshot_id` onto the canister. It fails if the snapshot was previously deleted.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This method loads a snapshot identified by `snapshot_id` onto the canister. It fails if no snapshot with the specified `snapshot_id` was created or if the snapshot was already deleted.
```

> Only controllers can take a snapshot of a canister and restore it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Only controllers can take a snapshot of a canister and load it back to the canister.
```

:::note

It's important to stop a canister before loading a snapshot to ensure that all outstanding callbacks are completed. Failing to do so may cause the canister to not make sense of the callbacks if its state is restored.
It is expected that the canister controllers (or their tooling) do this separately.

:::

### IC method `list_snapshots` {#ic-take_snapshot}

> This method lists the snapshots of the canister identified by `canister_id`. Currently, only one snapshot per canister will be stored.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This method lists the snapshots of the canister identified by `canister_id`. Currently, at most one snapshot per canister will be stored.
```

### IC method `delete_snapshot` {#ic-take_snapshot}

This method deletes a specified snapshot that belongs to an existing canister. An error will be returned if the snapshot is not found. 

> A snapshot cannot be found if it was previously deleted, replaced by a new snapshot through a `take_snapshot` request, or if the canister itself has been deleted or depleted of cycles.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A snapshot cannot be found if it was never created, it was previously deleted, replaced by a new snapshot through a `take_snapshot` request, or if the canister itself has been deleted or run out of cycles.
```

Subsequent `take_canister_snapshot` calls will create a new snapshot. However, a `take_canister_snapshot` call might fail if the maximum number of snapshots per canister is reached. This error can be avoided by providing a snapshot ID via the optional `replace_snapshot` parameter. The snapshot identified by the specified ID will be deleted once a new snapshot has been successfully created. Currently, only one snapshot per canister is allowed.

It's important to note that a snapshot will increase the memory footprint of the canister. Thus, the canister's balance must have a sufficient amount of cycles to support the new freezing threshold.

Only controllers can take a snapshot of a canister and load it back to the canister.

:::note

It's important to stop a canister before taking a snapshot to ensure that all outstanding callbacks are completed. Failing to do so may cause the canister to not make sense of the callbacks if its state is restored using the snapshot.
It is expected that the canister controllers (or their tooling) do this separately.

:::

### IC method `load_canister_snapshot` {#ic-load_canister_snapshot}

> This method loads a snapshot identified by `snapshot_id` onto the canister. It fails if no snapshot with the specified `snapshot_id` was created or if the snapshot was already deleted.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This method loads a snapshot identified by `snapshot_id` onto the canister. It fails if no snapshot with the specified `snapshot_id` can be found. 

A snapshot cannot be found if it was never created, it was previously deleted, replaced by a new snapshot through a `take_canister_snapshot` request, or if the canister itself has been deleted or run out of cycles.```

### IC method `take_snapshot` {#ic-take_snapshot}

> This method takes a snapshot of the specified canister. A snapshot consists of the wasm memory, stable memory, certified variables, wasm chunk store and binary.

Reviewer 3: and binary -> , and wasm binary

> This method takes a snapshot of the specified canister. A snapshot consists of the wasm memory, stable memory, certified variables, wasm chunk store and binary.

Reviewer 3: and binary -> , and wasm binary

### IC method `load_snapshot` {#ic-take_snapshot}

This method loads a snapshot identified by `snapshot_id` onto the canister. It fails if the snapshot was previously deleted.

Only controllers can take a snapshot of a canister and restore it.

:::note

It's important to stop a canister before loading a snapshot to ensure that all outstanding callbacks are completed. Failing to do so may cause the canister to not make sense of the callbacks if its state is restored.

> It is expected that the canister admin (or their tooling) does this separately.

Reviewer 3: canister admin -> canister controllers

> 

Reviewer 3: We should close the note environment here to fix markdown deployment.

### IC method `delete_snapshot` {#ic-take_snapshot}

This method deletes a specified snapshot of the canister. An error will be returned if the snapshot is not found. 

> A snapshot cannot be found if it was previously deleted, replaced by a new snapshot through a `take_snapshot` request, or if the canister itself has been deleted or depleted of cycles.

Reviewer 3: What if the canister is uninstalled? Do the snapshots get deleted?

Author: No, the controllers can still use the snapshot to restore the state of the canister.

Reviewer 3: This should also be reflected in the formal semantics - clearing `S.snapshots[A.canister_id]` if a canister is deleted or runs out of cycles.

The [standard nearest-rank estimation method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Percentile#The_nearest-rank_method), inclusive, with the addition of a 0th percentile is used. Concretely, for any i from 1 to 100, the ith percentile is the fee with rank `⌈i * 100⌉`. The 0th percentile is defined as the smallest fee (excluding coinbase transactions).

### IC method `take_canister_snapshot` {#ic-take_canister_snapshot}

This method takes a snapshot of the specified canister. A snapshot consists of the wasm memory, stable memory, certified variables, wasm chunk store and wasm binary.

> Subsequent `take_canister_snapshot` calls will create a new snapshot. However, a `take_canister_snapshot` call might fail if the maximum number of snapshots per canister is reached. This error can be avoided by providing a snapshot ID via the optional `replace_snapshot` parameter. The snapshot identified by the specified ID will be deleted once a new snapshot has been successfully created. Currently, only one snapshot per canister is allowed.

Reviewer 6: The spec says I can only take one snapshot per canister, but I tried the local replica, and I can take more than 1 snapshots. My local replica is configured as system subnet, not sure if that makes a difference.

Reviewer: Not sure this is true anymore, it depends which replica version you used. The latest should only allow 1 snapshot to be present at a time. You have to call `take_canister_snapshot` with `replace_snapshot_id` to succeed (which will overwrite the previous snapshot).

It's important to note that a snapshot will increase the memory footprint of the canister. Thus, the canister's balance must have a sufficient amount of cycles to support the new freezing threshold.

Only controllers can take a snapshot of a canister and load it back to the canister.

:::note

> It's important to stop a canister before taking a snapshot to ensure that all outstanding callbacks are completed. Failing to do so may cause the canister to not make sense of the callbacks if its state is restored using the snapshot.

Reviewer 6: Does it make sense for this method to stop the canister, take the snapshot and resume the canister? This way I can save two update calls, and it seems like we always need to do this three steps, right?

Reviewer: This is modelled similarly to `install_code`. Canisters without outgoing calls can safely take a snapshot without stopping (same as they can safely upgrade without stopping). If they do need to stop, then it's up to the canister to do the right thing.

It is expected that the canister controllers (or their tooling) do this separately.

:::

### IC method `load_canister_snapshot` {#ic-load_canister_snapshot}

This method loads a snapshot identified by `snapshot_id` onto the canister. It fails if no snapshot with the specified `snapshot_id` can be found.

> Only controllers can take a snapshot of a canister and load it back to the canister.

Reviewer 6: There is a corner case when the canister itself is the controller. Do we want to allow canister itself to load a snapshot? The await callback is almost guaranteed to fail in this case.

Reviewer: Same corner case as when the canister is a controller of itself and wants to upgrade itself. (Don't do it is my hot take here).

:::note

It's important to stop a canister before loading a snapshot to ensure that all outstanding callbacks are completed. Failing to do so may cause the canister to not make sense of the callbacks if its state is restored.
It is expected that the canister controllers (or their tooling) do this separately.

:::

The optional `sender_canister_version` parameter can contain the caller's canister version. If provided, its value must be equal to `ic0.canister_version`.

### IC method `list_canister_snapshots` {#ic-list_canister_snapshots}

This method lists the snapshots of the canister identified by `canister_id`. Only controllers of the canister can list its snapshots. Currently, at most one snapshot per canister will be stored.

### IC method `delete_canister_snapshot` {#ic-delete_canister_snapshot}

This method deletes a specified snapshot that belongs to an existing canister. An error will be returned if the snapshot is not found. 

> A snapshot cannot be found if it was never created, it was previously deleted, replaced by a new snapshot through a `take_canister_snapshot` request, or if the canister itself has been deleted or run out of cycles.

Reviewer 6: > run out of cycles

Just to double check, if the canister is out of cycles, we lose all the snapshots?

Reviewer: Yes.

Reviewer 6: Double check again, `uninstall_code` keeps the snapshot, only `delete_canister` removes the snapshot?

Reviewer 7: The `uninstall_code` method is sort of reseting the canister state. The canister ID is still the same, so it makes sense to keep the snapshots. On the other hand, `delete_canister` method deletes the canister ID, so at the moment there is no need to keep the snapshots any longer.

This behaviors might change in the future though, when the snapshot load across canisters is supported...

Reviewer 3: > This behaviors might change in the future though, when the snapshot load across canisters is supported...

Could you please elaborate on what exactly might change?

Reviewer 7: It's not even scoped yet. However, sharing snapshots across canister might require some changes in snapshot ownership...

- `num_block_failures_total` (`nat64`): the number of failed block proposals by this node.

### IC method `take_canister_snapshot` {#ic-take_canister_snapshot}

This method takes a snapshot of the specified canister. A snapshot consists of the wasm memory, stable memory, certified variables, wasm chunk store and wasm binary.

Subsequent `take_canister_snapshot` calls will create a new snapshot. However, a `take_canister_snapshot` call might fail if the maximum number of snapshots per canister is reached. This error can be avoided by providing a snapshot ID via the optional `replace_snapshot` parameter. The snapshot identified by the specified ID will be deleted once a new snapshot has been successfully created. Currently, only one snapshot per canister is allowed.

> It's important to note that a snapshot will increase the memory footprint of the canister. Thus, the canister's balance must have a sufficient amount of cycles to support the new freezing threshold.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It's important to note that a snapshot will increase the memory footprint of the canister. Thus, the canister's balance must have a sufficient amount of cycles to not become frozen.
```

          memory_allocation : Nat;
          memory_usage_raw_module : Nat;
          memory_usage_canister_history : Nat;

>           memory_usage_snapshots: Nat;

Reviewer 3: this field does not seem to be initialized

          mode : CodeDeploymentMode;
          module_hash : Blob;
        }

>       | LoadSnapshot {

Reviewer 3: Please also add this variant to spec/_attachments/ic.did

>           module_hash : Blob;

Reviewer 3: should we maybe also include the timestamp at which the snapshot was taken?

      subnet_id : Principal;
      subnet_size : Nat;
    }

>     Snapshot = {

Reviewer 3: maybe we should store the system-generated snapshot ID here so that we can check it later

      wasm_state : WasmState;
      raw_module : Blob;
      chunk_store : ChunkStore;
      certified_data: Blob;
    }
    S = {
      requests : Request ↦ (RequestStatus, Principal);
      canisters : CanisterId ↦ CanState;

>       snapshots: SnapshotId ↦ Snapshot;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      snapshots: CanisterId ↦ Snapshot;
```

        freezing_limit(compute_allocation, memory_allocation, freezing_threshold, memory_usage, subnet_size) = idle_cycles_burned_rate(compute_allocation, memory_allocation, memory_usage, subnet_size) * freezing_threshold / (24 * 60 * 60)

> The (unspecified) functions `memory_usage_wasm_state(wasm_state)`, `memory_usage_raw_module(raw_module)`,`memory_usage_canister_history(canister_history)` and `memory_usage_snapshot(snapshot)` determine the canister's memory usage in bytes consumed by its Wasm state, raw Wasm binary, and canister history, respectively.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The (unspecified) functions `memory_usage_wasm_state(wasm_state)`, `memory_usage_raw_module(raw_module)`, `memory_usage_canister_history(canister_history)` and `memory_usage_snapshot(snapshot)` determine the canister's memory usage in bytes consumed by its Wasm state, raw Wasm binary, and canister history, respectively.
```

      S.freezing_threshold[E.content.canister_id],
      memory_usage_wasm_state(S.canisters[E.content.canister_id].wasm_state) +
        memory_usage_raw_module(S.canisters[E.content.canister_id].raw_module) +
        memory_usage_canister_history(S.canister_history[E.content.canister_id]) +

>         memory_usage_snapshot(S.snapshots[E.content.canister_id]),

Reviewer 3: S.snapshots should be introduced (along with the type) in the definition of the IC state (abbreviated by S here) and initiliazed in the definition of the initial IC state.

Author: I am not sure where exactly you mean. You mean here: https://github.com/dfinity/interface-spec/blob/master/spec/index.md?plain=1#L2960?

Reviewer 3: yes and also here: https://github.com/dfinity/interface-spec/blob/125ca124ddfcfcda520ca107e266e8faaeb627bc/spec/index.md?plain=1#L3028

  ) ≥ 0
  (S.memory_allocation[M.receiver] = 0) or (memory_usage_wasm_state(res.new_state) +
    memory_usage_raw_module(S.canisters[M.receiver].raw_module) +

>     memory_usage_canister_history(S.canister_history[M.receiver] ≤ S.memory_allocation[M.receiver])

Reviewer 3: why are we ignoring snapshot memory here?

Author: Clarifying it offline.

else:
  New_reserved_balance_limit = 5_000_000_000_000

> Cycles_reserved = cycles_to_reserve(S, Canister_id, New_compute_allocation, New_memory_allocation,  S.snapshots[A.canister_id], EmptyCanister.wasm_state)

Reviewer 3: the canister has just been created so there's no snapshot yet, we should use `null` here and also define `snapshots[Canister_id] = null` in the "State after" section.

Author: Ok, I was thinking that this could be interpreted as an empty list. But I will use null to make it clearer.

```

> #### IC Management Canister: List snapshots

Reviewer 3: Take snapshot is missing as an IC mgmt canister method here in the formal semantics

> Only the controllers of the given canister can get a list of the existing snapshots.

Reviewer 3: this condition is missing in the formal semantics below

```html

S.messages = Older_messages · CallMessage M · Younger_messages
(M.queue = Unordered) or (∀ msg ∈ Older_messages. msg.queue ≠ M.queue)

> M.method_name = 'list_snapshots'

Reviewer 3: the receiver is missing - it should be the mgmt canister

M.arg = candid(A)

> S.snapshots = Other_snapshots ∪ S.snapshots[A.snapshot_id]

Reviewer 3: Why are you updating snapshots here?

> S.snapshots = Other_snapshots ∪ S.snapshots[A.snapshot_id]

Reviewer 3: Why are you updating snapshots here?

```

State after

```html

S with
    messages = Older_messages · Younger_messages ·
      ResponseMessage {
        origin = M.origin
        response = candid(dom(S.snapshots[A.canister_id]))
      }

```
#### IC Management Canister: Delete snapshot

A snapshot may be deleted only by the controllers of the canister for which the snapshot was taken.

```html

S.messages = Older_messages · CallMessage M · Younger_messages
(M.queue = Unordered) or (∀ msg ∈ Older_messages. msg.queue ≠ M.queue)

> M.method_name = 'delete_snapshot'

Reviewer 3: the receiver is missing - it should be the mgmt canister

M.arg = candid(A)
M.caller ∈ S.controllers[S.snapshots[A.snapshot_id].canister_id]

> S.snapshots = Other_snapshots ∪ S.snapshots[A.snapshot_id]

Reviewer 3: I'd drop this line and define
```
S.snapshots[A.snapshot_id] = (deleted)
```
in the state after (see canister deletion for reference)

```

#### IC Management Canister: Take snapshot

Only the controllers of the given canister can take a snapshot.

```html

S.messages = Older_messages · CallMessage M · Younger_messages
(M.queue = Unordered) or (∀ msg ∈ Older_messages. msg.queue ≠ M.queue)
M.callee = ic_principal
M.method_name = 'take_snapshot'
M.arg = candid(A)
M.caller ∈ S.controllers[A.canister_id]

> Cycles_reserved = cycles_to_reserve(S, A.canister_id, S.compute_allocation[A.canister_id], S.memory_allocation[A.canister_id] + memory_usage_snapshot(New_snapshot), S.canisters[A.canister_id])

Reviewer 3: ```
S.memory_allocation[A.canister_id] + memory_usage_snapshot(New_snapshot)
```
the addition wouldn't make sense if memory allocation is fixed (i.e., not best-effort)

Reviewer 3: We should pass S.memory_allocation[A.canister_id] here and add a new argument to cycles_to_reserve representing the snapshots in the IC state.

Author: Discussing offline.

> New_balance = S.balances[A.canister_id] - Cycles_used - Cycles_reserved

Reviewer 3: What are `Cycles_used`? Let's introduce them (abstractly) in the text above (before "Only controllers...").

Author: How do we introduce this? I mean, I have looked at other definitions, and no method has this defined this.

Reviewer 3: OK. Then let's leave this as is for now.

New_reserved_balance = S.reserved_balances[A.canister_id] + Cycles_reserved
New_reserved_balance ≤ S.reserved_balance_limits[A.canister_id]

liquid_balance(
  New_balance,
  New_reserved_balance,
  freezing_limit(
    S.compute_allocation[A.canister_id],
    S.memory_allocation[A.canister_id],
    S.freezing_threshold[A.canister_id],
    memory_usage_wasm_state(New_state) +
      memory_usage_raw_module(A.wasm_module) +
      memory_usage_canister_history(New_canister_history) +
      memory_usage_snapshot(New_snapshot),
    S.canister_subnet[A.canister_id].subnet_size,
  )
) ≥ 0

```

State after  

```html

S with

>     snapshots = Other_snapshots · New_snapshot

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    snapshots[SnapshotId] = New_snapshot
```
and we should formally define `New_snapshot` above.

    balances[A.canister_id] = New_balance
    reserved_balances[A.canister_id] = New_reserved_balance
    messages = Older_messages · Younger_messages ·
      ResponseMessage {
        origin = M.origin;

>         response = Reply (candid());

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        response = Reply (candid(SnapshotId));
```

        refunded_cycles = M.transferred_cycles;
      }

```

#### IC Management Canister: Load snapshots

Only the controllers of the given canister can load a snapshot.

```html

S.messages = Older_messages · CallMessage M · Younger_messages
(M.queue = Unordered) or (∀ msg ∈ Older_messages. msg.queue ≠ M.queue)
M.callee = ic_principal
M.method_name = 'load_snapshot'
M.arg = candid(A)

> M.caller ∈ S.controllers[S.snapshots[A.snapshot_id].canister_id]

Reviewer 3: Above, S.snapshots was indexed by canister ID, here it's indexed by snapshot ID. I suppose, the snapshots will be part of the canister's state in the replica implementation and thus it makes sense to index S.snapshots by canister IDs (and also require a canister ID in the mgmt calls arguments so that the mapping snapshot ID -> canister ID does not need to be computed by the replica separately)

Author: I think I forgot top reply to this one. We don't have canister Id here. The snapshots are stored in the replica, not on canister. If you have any idea how to reflect that in the semantics, please let me know. Otherwise, I will consider this as done.

> Env = { 

Reviewer 3: Why are you defining an Env here that is not used later? It seems like you only need to parse the custom sections.

  canister_id = S.snapshots[A.snapshot_id].canister_id;
  balance = S.balances[canister_id];
  Public_custom_sections = parse_public_custom_sections(S.snapshots[canister_id].wasm_module);
  Private_custom_sections = parse_private_custom_sections(S.snapshots[canister_id].wasm_module);
}

> New_balance = balance - Cycles_used - S.reserved_balances[canister_id]

Reviewer 3: why deduct the reserved balance here?

> New_balance = balance - Cycles_used - S.reserved_balances[canister_id]

Reviewer 3: `Cycles_used` should be defined in the text above (before "Only controllers...")

Only the controllers of the given canister can get a list of the existing snapshots.

```html

S.messages = Older_messages · CallMessage M · Younger_messages
(M.queue = Unordered) or (∀ msg ∈ Older_messages. msg.queue ≠ M.queue)
M.method_name = 'list_snapshots'
M.arg = candid(A)
S.snapshots = Other_snapshots ∪ S.snapshots[A.snapshot_id]

```

State after

```html

S with
    messages = Older_messages · Younger_messages ·
      ResponseMessage {
        origin = M.origin
        response = candid(dom(S.snapshots[A.canister_id]))
      }

```
#### IC Management Canister: Delete snapshot

A snapshot may be deleted only by the controllers of the canister for which the snapshot was taken.

```html

S.messages = Older_messages · CallMessage M · Younger_messages
(M.queue = Unordered) or (∀ msg ∈ Older_messages. msg.queue ≠ M.queue)
M.method_name = 'delete_snapshot'
M.arg = candid(A)
M.caller ∈ S.controllers[S.snapshots[A.snapshot_id].canister_id]
S.snapshots = Other_snapshots ∪ S.snapshots[A.snapshot_id]

```

State after

```html

S with
    snapshots = Other_snapshots
    messages = Older_messages · Younger_messages ·
      ResponseMessage {
        origin = M.origin

>         response = candid()

Reviewer 3: refunded cycles are missing - please also checkout for the other cases

```

#### IC Management Canister: Take snapshot

Only the controllers of the given canister can take a snapshot.

```html

S.messages = Older_messages · CallMessage M · Younger_messages
(M.queue = Unordered) or (∀ msg ∈ Older_messages. msg.queue ≠ M.queue)
M.callee = ic_principal
M.method_name = 'take_snapshot'
M.arg = candid(A)
M.caller ∈ S.controllers[A.canister_id]

New_snapshot = Snapshot {
  wasm_state = canisters[A.canister_id].wasm_state;
  raw_module = canisters[A.canister_id].raw_module;
  wasm_module = canisters[A.canister_id].wasm_module;
  chunk_store = canisters[A.canister_id].chunk_store;
}
Cycles_reserved = cycles_to_reserve(S, A.canister_id, S.compute_allocation[A.canister_id], S.memory_allocation[A.canister_id], New_snapshot, S.canisters[A.canister_id])
New_balance = S.balances[A.canister_id] - Cycles_used - Cycles_reserved
New_reserved_balance = S.reserved_balances[A.canister_id] + Cycles_reserved
New_reserved_balance ≤ S.reserved_balance_limits[A.canister_id]

liquid_balance(
  New_balance,
  New_reserved_balance,
  freezing_limit(
    S.compute_allocation[A.canister_id],
    S.memory_allocation[A.canister_id],
    S.freezing_threshold[A.canister_id],

>     memory_usage_wasm_state(New_state) +

Reviewer 3: there's no new state after taking a snapshot

>       memory_usage_raw_module(A.wasm_module) +

Reviewer 3: A.wasm_module is undefined, the wasm_module must be fetched from the IC state `S...`

>       memory_usage_canister_history(New_canister_history) +

Reviewer 3: Taking snapshots need not be recorded in the canister history, right?

Author: Yes, it will not be. Will fix this.

      memory_usage_snapshot(New_snapshot),
    S.canister_subnet[A.canister_id].subnet_size,
  )
) ≥ 0

```

State after  

```html

S with
    snapshots[A.canister_id] = New_snapshot
    balances[A.canister_id] = New_balance
    reserved_balances[A.canister_id] = New_reserved_balance
    messages = Older_messages · Younger_messages ·
      ResponseMessage {
        origin = M.origin;

>         response = Reply (candid(SnapshotId));

Reviewer 3: Could we maybe leave a comment that `SnapshotId` is an opaque nat generated by the system?

It is also not stored anywhere, so listing snapshots by their IDs is impossible.

        refunded_cycles = M.transferred_cycles;
      }

```

#### IC Management Canister: Load snapshots

Only the controllers of the given canister can load a snapshot.

```html

S.messages = Older_messages · CallMessage M · Younger_messages
(M.queue = Unordered) or (∀ msg ∈ Older_messages. msg.queue ≠ M.queue)
M.callee = ic_principal
M.method_name = 'load_snapshot'
M.arg = candid(A)
M.caller ∈ S.controllers[A.canister_id]

New_balance = S.balances[A.canister_id] - Cycles_used
liquid_balance(
  New_balance,

>   S.reserved_balances[A.canister_id],

Reviewer 3: Loading a snapshot can increase the canister's memory footprint and thus trigger cycle reservation => we need to compute a New_reserved_balance here.

  freezing_limit(
    S.compute_allocation[A.canister_id],
    S.memory_allocation[A.canister_id],
    S.freezing_threshold[A.canister_id],

>     memory_usage_wasm_state(S.canisters[A.canister_id]) +

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    memory_usage_wasm_state(S.canisters[A.canister_id].wasm_state) +
```

Reviewer 3: same everywhere else

>       memory_usage_raw_module(A.wasm_module) +

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      memory_usage_raw_module(S.canisters[A.canister_id].raw_module) +
```

Reviewer 3: same everywhere else

>       memory_usage_canister_history(New_canister_history) +

Reviewer 3: How is New_canister_history defined? You'd also need to extend the canister history entry enum with a new variant and append it to the canister history.

      memory_usage_snapshot(S.snapshots[A.canister_id]),
    S.canister_subnet[A.canister_id].subnet_size,
  )
) ≥ 0

```

State after  

```html

S with
    canisters[A.canister_id] = {
      wasm_state = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].wasm_state;
      raw_module = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].raw_module;

>       module = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].wasm_module;

Reviewer 3: since we're already parsing the custom section, we could parse the wasm module from the raw module and drop wasm_module from `Snapshot = {`: module = parse_wasm_mod(S.snapshots[A.canister_id].raw_module)

      chunk_store = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].chunk_store;

>       public_custom_sections = parse_public_custom_sections(S.snapshots[A.canister_id].wasm_module);
>       private_custom_sections = parse_private_custom_sections(S.snapshots[A.canister_id].wasm_module);

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      public_custom_sections = parse_public_custom_sections(S.snapshots[A.canister_id].raw_module);
      private_custom_sections = parse_private_custom_sections(S.snapshots[A.canister_id].raw_module);
```

Author: Thanks for the thorough review. I think we need to go through the semantics for the other (already) defined management methods. Based on your comments,  I am updating the other methods(in this PR), but I think there are more inconsistencies.

    }
    balances[A.canister_id] = New_balance
    messages = Older_messages · Younger_messages ·
      ResponseMessage {
        origin = M.origin;
        response = Reply (candid());
        refunded_cycles = M.transferred_cycles;
      }

```

#### IC Management Canister: List snapshots

Only the controllers of the given canister can get a list of the existing snapshots.

```html

S.messages = Older_messages · CallMessage M · Younger_messages
(M.queue = Unordered) or (∀ msg ∈ Older_messages. msg.queue ≠ M.queue)
M.callee = ic_principal
M.method_name = 'list_snapshots'
M.arg = candid(A)
M.caller ∈ S.controllers[A.canister_id]

```

State after

```html

S with
    messages = Older_messages · Younger_messages ·
      ResponseMessage {
        origin = M.origin

>         response = Reply( candid(dom(S.snapshots[A.canister_id])))

Reviewer 3: Using `dom(...)` wouldn't work here since you define `snapshots` to be a single snapshot (not a map of snapshot IDs to their corresponding snapshots).

        refunded_cycles = M.transferred_cycles
      }

```
#### IC Management Canister: Delete snapshot

A snapshot may be deleted only by the controllers of the canister for which the snapshot was taken.

```html

S.messages = Older_messages · CallMessage M · Younger_messages
(M.queue = Unordered) or (∀ msg ∈ Older_messages. msg.queue ≠ M.queue)
M.callee = ic_principal
M.method_name = 'delete_snapshot'
M.arg = candid(A)

> M.caller ∈ S.controllers[S.snapshots[A.snapshot_id].canister_id]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
M.caller ∈ S.controllers[A.canister_id]
```
note that a snapshot does not store a canister ID according to the definition of `Snapshot = {` above.

> S.snapshots[A.snapshot_id] = (deleted)

Reviewer 3: Here we need a canister ID instead of snapshot ID since keys of the map are canister IDs.

```

#### IC Management Canister: Take canister snapshot

Only the controllers of the given canister can take a snapshot.

```html

S.messages = Older_messages · CallMessage M · Younger_messages
(M.queue = Unordered) or (∀ msg ∈ Older_messages. msg.queue ≠ M.queue)
M.callee = ic_principal
M.method_name = 'take_canister_snapshot'
M.arg = candid(A)
M.caller ∈ S.controllers[A.canister_id]

> 

Reviewer 3: We should check here that no snapshot is stored for a canister or A.replace_snapshot is set to the snapshot ID of the currently stored snapshot.

    S.freezing_threshold[A.canister_id],
    memory_usage_wasm_state(S.canisters[A.canister_id].wasm_state) +
      memory_usage_raw_module(S.canisters[A.canister_id].raw_module) +
      memory_usage_canister_history(S.canister_history[A.canister_id]) +
      memory_usage_snapshot(New_snapshot),
    S.canister_subnet[A.canister_id].subnet_size,
  )
) ≥ 0

```

State after  

```html

S with
    snapshots[A.canister_id] = New_snapshot
    balances[A.canister_id] = New_balance
    reserved_balances[A.canister_id] = New_reserved_balance
    messages = Older_messages · Younger_messages ·
      ResponseMessage {
        origin = M.origin;
        response = Reply (candid(SnapshotId)); // `SnapshotId` is an opaque ID generated by the system.
        refunded_cycles = M.transferred_cycles;
      }

```

#### IC Management Canister: Load canister snapshot

Only the controllers of the given canister can load a snapshot.

```html

S.messages = Older_messages · CallMessage M · Younger_messages
(M.queue = Unordered) or (∀ msg ∈ Older_messages. msg.queue ≠ M.queue)
M.callee = ic_principal
M.method_name = 'load_canister_snapshot'
M.arg = candid(A)
M.caller ∈ S.controllers[A.canister_id]

> 

Reviewer 3: We should check here that the snapshot stored for the canister has a matching snapshot ID according to A.snapshot_id

New_state = {
  wasm_state = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].wasm_state;
  raw_module = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].raw_module;
  module = parse_wasm_mod(S.snapshots[A.canister_id].raw_module;
  chunk_store = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].chunk_store;
  public_custom_sections = parse_public_custom_sections(S.snapshots[A.canister_id].raw_module);
  private_custom_sections = parse_private_custom_sections(S.snapshots[A.canister_id].raw_module);
}
Cycles_reserved = cycles_to_reserve(S, A.canister_id, S.compute_allocation[A.canister_id], S.memory_allocation[A.canister_id], S.snapshots[A.canister_id], New_state)
New_balance = S.balances[A.canister_id] - Cycles_used - Cycles_reserved
New_reserved_balance = S.reserved_balances[A.canister_id] + Cycles_reserved
New_reserved_balance ≤ S.reserved_balance_limits[A.canister_id]

S.canister_history[A.canister_id] = {
  total_num_changes = N;
  recent_changes = H;
}
New_canister_history = {
  total_num_changes = N + 1;
  recent_changes = H · {
    timestamp_nanos = S.time[A.canister_id];
    canister_version = S.canister_version[A.canister_id] + 1
    origin = change_origin(M.caller, A.sender_canister_version, M.origin);
    details = LoadSnapshot {

>       module_hash = SHA-256(New_state.wasm_module);

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      module_hash = SHA-256(New_state.raw_module);
```

    };
  };
}

liquid_balance(
  New_balance,
  New_reserved_balance,
  freezing_limit(
    S.compute_allocation[A.canister_id],
    S.memory_allocation[A.canister_id],
    S.freezing_threshold[A.canister_id],
    memory_usage_wasm_state(New_state.wasm_state) +
      memory_usage_raw_module(New_state.raw_module) +
      memory_usage_canister_history(New_canister_history) +
      memory_usage_snapshot(S.snapshots[A.canister_id]),
    S.canister_subnet[A.canister_id].subnet_size,
  )
) ≥ 0

if S.memory_allocation[A.canister_id] > 0:
  memory_usage_wasm_state(New_state.wasm_state) +
    memory_usage_raw_module(New_state.raw_module) +

>     memory_usage_canister_history(New_canister_history) ≤ S.memory_allocation[A.canister_id]

Author: Discussed offline.

```

State after  

```html

S with

>     canisters[A.canister_id] = {
>       wasm_state = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].wasm_state;
>       raw_module = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].raw_module;
>       module = parse_wasm_mod(S.snapshots[A.canister_id].raw_module;
>       chunk_store = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].chunk_store;
>       public_custom_sections = parse_public_custom_sections(S.snapshots[A.canister_id].raw_module);
>       private_custom_sections = parse_private_custom_sections(S.snapshots[A.canister_id].raw_module);
>     }

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    canisters[A.canister_id] = New_state
```

        response = Reply (candid());
        refunded_cycles = M.transferred_cycles;
      }

```

#### IC Management Canister: List canister snapshots

Only the controllers of the given canister can get a list of the existing snapshots.

```html

S.messages = Older_messages · CallMessage M · Younger_messages
(M.queue = Unordered) or (∀ msg ∈ Older_messages. msg.queue ≠ M.queue)
M.callee = ic_principal
M.method_name = 'list_canister_snapshots'
M.arg = candid(A)
M.caller ∈ S.controllers[A.canister_id]

```

State after

```html

S with
    messages = Older_messages · Younger_messages ·
      ResponseMessage {
        origin = M.origin
        response = Reply (candid(S.snapshots[A.canister_id]))
        refunded_cycles = M.transferred_cycles
      }

```
#### IC Management Canister: Delete canister snapshot

A snapshot may be deleted only by the controllers of the canister for which the snapshot was taken.

```html

S.messages = Older_messages · CallMessage M · Younger_messages
(M.queue = Unordered) or (∀ msg ∈ Older_messages. msg.queue ≠ M.queue)
M.callee = ic_principal
M.method_name = 'delete_canister_snapshot'
M.arg = candid(A)
M.caller ∈ S.controllers[A.canister_id]

> S.snapshots[A.canister_id] = (deleted)

Reviewer 3: this belongs to State after; instead we should check here that the snapshot stored for the canister has a matching snapshot ID according to A.snapshot_id

```

#### IC Management Canister: Take canister snapshot

Only the controllers of the given canister can take a snapshot.

```html

S.messages = Older_messages · CallMessage M · Younger_messages
(M.queue = Unordered) or (∀ msg ∈ Older_messages. msg.queue ≠ M.queue)
M.callee = ic_principal
M.method_name = 'take_canister_snapshot'
M.arg = candid(A)

> is_system_assigned Snapshot_id    // Snapshot ID is an opaque generated by the system

Reviewer 3: The function `is_system_assigned` is defined for principals => let's introduce the variable `Snapshot_id` informally after the sentence "Only the controllers of the given canister can take a snapshot." above.

M.caller ∈ S.controllers[A.canister_id]
if A.replace_snapshot is not null:
  S.snapshots[A.canister_id].snapshot_id = A.replace_snapshot
else:
  S.snapshots[A.canister_id] = null

New_snapshot = Snapshot {
  snapshot_id = Snapshot_id;

>   wasm_state = canisters[A.canister_id].wasm_state;
>   raw_module = canisters[A.canister_id].raw_module;
>   chunk_store = canisters[A.canister_id].chunk_store;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  wasm_state = S.canisters[A.canister_id].wasm_state;
  raw_module = S.canisters[A.canister_id].raw_module;
  chunk_store = S.canisters[A.canister_id].chunk_store;
```

  certified_data = S.certified_data[A.canister_id];
  canister_version = S.canister_version[A.canister_id];

>   take_at_timestamp = CurrentTime;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  take_at_timestamp = S.time[A.canister_id];
```

}
Cycles_reserved = cycles_to_reserve(S, A.canister_id, S.compute_allocation[A.canister_id], S.memory_allocation[A.canister_id], New_snapshot, S.canisters[A.canister_id])
New_balance = S.balances[A.canister_id] - Cycles_used - Cycles_reserved
New_reserved_balance = S.reserved_balances[A.canister_id] + Cycles_reserved
New_reserved_balance ≤ S.reserved_balance_limits[A.canister_id]

liquid_balance(
  New_balance,
  New_reserved_balance,
  freezing_limit(
    S.compute_allocation[A.canister_id],
    S.memory_allocation[A.canister_id],
    S.freezing_threshold[A.canister_id],
    memory_usage_wasm_state(S.canisters[A.canister_id].wasm_state) +
      memory_usage_raw_module(S.canisters[A.canister_id].raw_module) +
      memory_usage_canister_history(S.canister_history[A.canister_id]) +
      memory_usage_snapshot(New_snapshot),
    S.canister_subnet[A.canister_id].subnet_size,
  )
) ≥ 0

> R = <implementation-specific>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
we can actually specify it (see suggestion below)

```

State after  

```html

S with
    snapshots[A.canister_id] = New_snapshot
    balances[A.canister_id] = New_balance
    reserved_balances[A.canister_id] = New_reserved_balance
    messages = Older_messages · Younger_messages ·
      ResponseMessage {
        origin = M.origin;

>         response = Reply (candid(R)); 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        response = Reply (candid({
          id = Snapshot_id;
          taken_at_timestamp = S.time[A.canister_id];
          total_size = memory_usage_snapshot(New_snapshot);
        }))
```

        refunded_cycles = M.transferred_cycles;
      }

```

#### IC Management Canister: Load canister snapshot

Only the controllers of the given canister can load a snapshot.

```html

S.messages = Older_messages · CallMessage M · Younger_messages
(M.queue = Unordered) or (∀ msg ∈ Older_messages. msg.queue ≠ M.queue)
M.callee = ic_principal
M.method_name = 'load_canister_snapshot'
M.arg = candid(A)
M.caller ∈ S.controllers[A.canister_id]
S.snapshots[A.canister_id].snapshot_id  = A.snapshot_id

New_state = {
  wasm_state = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].wasm_state;
  raw_module = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].raw_module;

>   module = parse_wasm_mod(S.snapshots[A.canister_id].raw_module;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  module = parse_wasm_mod(S.snapshots[A.canister_id].raw_module);
```

>   chunk_store = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].chunk_store;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
chunk_store is modeled separately from canister state in this spec

  public_custom_sections = parse_public_custom_sections(S.snapshots[A.canister_id].raw_module);
  private_custom_sections = parse_private_custom_sections(S.snapshots[A.canister_id].raw_module);
}
Cycles_reserved = cycles_to_reserve(S, A.canister_id, S.compute_allocation[A.canister_id], S.memory_allocation[A.canister_id], S.snapshots[A.canister_id], New_state)
New_balance = S.balances[A.canister_id] - Cycles_used - Cycles_reserved
New_reserved_balance = S.reserved_balances[A.canister_id] + Cycles_reserved
New_reserved_balance ≤ S.reserved_balance_limits[A.canister_id]

S.canister_history[A.canister_id] = {
  total_num_changes = N;
  recent_changes = H;
}
New_canister_history = {
  total_num_changes = N + 1;
  recent_changes = H · {
    timestamp_nanos = S.time[A.canister_id];
    canister_version = S.canister_version[A.canister_id] + 1
    origin = change_origin(M.caller, A.sender_canister_version, M.origin);
    details = LoadSnapshot {

>       canister_version: S.snapshots[A.canister_id].canister_version
>       taken_at_timestamp: S.snapshots[A.canister_id].take_at_timestamp

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      canister_version = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].canister_version;
      taken_at_timestamp = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].take_at_timestamp;
```

    };
  };
}

liquid_balance(
  New_balance,
  New_reserved_balance,
  freezing_limit(
    S.compute_allocation[A.canister_id],
    S.memory_allocation[A.canister_id],
    S.freezing_threshold[A.canister_id],
    memory_usage_wasm_state(New_state.wasm_state) +
      memory_usage_raw_module(New_state.raw_module) +
      memory_usage_canister_history(New_canister_history) +
      memory_usage_snapshot(S.snapshots[A.canister_id]),
    S.canister_subnet[A.canister_id].subnet_size,
  )
) ≥ 0

if S.memory_allocation[A.canister_id] > 0:
  memory_usage_wasm_state(New_state.wasm_state) +
    memory_usage_raw_module(New_state.raw_module) +
    memory_usage_canister_history(New_canister_history) ≤ S.memory_allocation[A.canister_id]

```

State after  

```html

S with

>     canisters[A.canister_id] = New_state

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    canisters[A.canister_id] = New_state
    chunk_store[A.canister_id] = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].chunk_store
```

    certified_data[A.canister_id] = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].certified_data
    balances[A.canister_id] = New_balance
    reserved_balances[Canister_id] = New_reserved_balance
    canister_history[Canister_id] = New_canister_history
    messages = Older_messages · Younger_messages ·
      ResponseMessage {
        origin = M.origin;
        response = Reply (candid());
        refunded_cycles = M.transferred_cycles;
      }

```

#### IC Management Canister: List canister snapshots

Only the controllers of the given canister can get a list of the existing snapshots.

```html

S.messages = Older_messages · CallMessage M · Younger_messages
(M.queue = Unordered) or (∀ msg ∈ Older_messages. msg.queue ≠ M.queue)
M.callee = ic_principal
M.method_name = 'list_canister_snapshots'
M.arg = candid(A)
M.caller ∈ S.controllers[A.canister_id]

```

State after

```html

S with
    messages = Older_messages · Younger_messages ·
      ResponseMessage {
        origin = M.origin

>         response = Reply (candid(S.snapshots[A.canister_id]))

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        response = Reply (candid({
          id = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].snapshot_id;
          taken_at_timestamp = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].taken_at_timestamp;
          total_size = memory_usage_snapshot(S.snapshots[A.canister_id]);
        }))
```

M.method_name = 'load_canister_snapshot'
M.arg = candid(A)
M.caller ∈ S.controllers[A.canister_id]

New_state = {
  wasm_state = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].wasm_state;
  raw_module = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].raw_module;
  module = parse_wasm_mod(S.snapshots[A.canister_id].raw_module;
  chunk_store = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].chunk_store;
  public_custom_sections = parse_public_custom_sections(S.snapshots[A.canister_id].raw_module);
  private_custom_sections = parse_private_custom_sections(S.snapshots[A.canister_id].raw_module);
}
Cycles_reserved = cycles_to_reserve(S, A.canister_id, S.compute_allocation[A.canister_id], S.memory_allocation[A.canister_id], S.snapshots[A.canister_id], New_state)
New_balance = S.balances[A.canister_id] - Cycles_used - Cycles_reserved
New_reserved_balance = S.reserved_balances[A.canister_id] + Cycles_reserved
New_reserved_balance ≤ S.reserved_balance_limits[A.canister_id]

S.canister_history[A.canister_id] = {
  total_num_changes = N;
  recent_changes = H;
}
New_canister_history = {
  total_num_changes = N + 1;
  recent_changes = H · {
    timestamp_nanos = S.time[A.canister_id];
    canister_version = S.canister_version[A.canister_id] + 1

>     origin = change_origin(M.caller, null, M.origin);

Author: `change_origin` usually has a sender_canister_version. I set parameter as null, is this correct?

Reviewer 3: The sender_canister_version is null for ingress messages and for inter-canister calls, it is parsed from the candid argument - please see other mgmt canister methods updating history for how it's done there.

Author: Yes, I have checked the other methods. Basically, I wanted to ask if I should add it to the candid and pass it to this function after parsing it?

          taken_at_timestamp = S.time[A.canister_id];
          total_size = memory_usage_snapshot(New_snapshot);
        }));
        refunded_cycles = M.transferred_cycles;
      }

```

#### IC Management Canister: Load canister snapshot

Only the controllers of the given canister can load a snapshot.

```html

S.messages = Older_messages · CallMessage M · Younger_messages
(M.queue = Unordered) or (∀ msg ∈ Older_messages. msg.queue ≠ M.queue)
M.callee = ic_principal
M.method_name = 'load_canister_snapshot'
M.arg = candid(A)
M.caller ∈ S.controllers[A.canister_id]
S.snapshots[A.canister_id].snapshot_id = A.snapshot_id

New_state = {
  wasm_state = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].wasm_state;
  raw_module = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].raw_module;
  module = parse_wasm_mod(S.snapshots[A.canister_id].raw_module);
  public_custom_sections = parse_public_custom_sections(S.snapshots[A.canister_id].raw_module);
  private_custom_sections = parse_private_custom_sections(S.snapshots[A.canister_id].raw_module);
}
Cycles_reserved = cycles_to_reserve(S, A.canister_id, S.compute_allocation[A.canister_id], S.memory_allocation[A.canister_id], S.snapshots[A.canister_id], New_state)

> New_balance = S.balances[A.canister_id] - Cycles_used - Cycles_reserved

Reviewer 3: > Cycles_used

Does loading snapshot cost cycles?

      canister_version = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].canister_version
      taken_at_timestamp = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].take_at_timestamp
    };
  };
}

liquid_balance(
  New_balance,
  New_reserved_balance,
  freezing_limit(
    S.compute_allocation[A.canister_id],
    S.memory_allocation[A.canister_id],
    S.freezing_threshold[A.canister_id],
    memory_usage_wasm_state(New_state.wasm_state) +
      memory_usage_raw_module(New_state.raw_module) +
      memory_usage_canister_history(New_canister_history) +
      memory_usage_snapshot(S.snapshots[A.canister_id]),
    S.canister_subnet[A.canister_id].subnet_size,
  )
) ≥ 0

if S.memory_allocation[A.canister_id] > 0:
  memory_usage_wasm_state(New_state.wasm_state) +
    memory_usage_raw_module(New_state.raw_module) +
    memory_usage_canister_history(New_canister_history) +
    memory_usage_snapshot(S.snapshots[A.canister_id]) ≤ S.memory_allocation[A.canister_id]

```

State after  

```html

S with
    canisters[A.canister_id] = New_state
    chunk_store[A.canister_id] = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].chunk_store
    certified_data[A.canister_id] = S.snapshots[A.canister_id].certified_data
    balances[A.canister_id] = New_balance

>     reserved_balances[Canister_id] = New_reserved_balance
>     canister_history[Canister_id] = New_canister_history

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    reserved_balances[A.canister_id] = New_reserved_balance
    canister_history[A.canister_id] = New_canister_history
    canister_version[A.canister_id] = S.canister_version[A.canister_id] + 1
```
